# Minute Man

The Minute Man[note 1] is an 1874 sculpture by Daniel Chester French in Minute Man National Historical Park, Concord, Massachusetts. It was created between 1871 and 1874 after extensive research, and was originally intended to be made of stone. The medium was switched to bronze and it was cast from ten Civil War-era cannons appropriated by Congress.

The statue depicts a minuteman stepping away from his plow to join the patriot forces at the Battle of Concord, at the start of the American Revolutionary War. The young man has an overcoat thrown over his plow, and has a musket in his hand. Nineteenth-century art historians noticed that the pose resembles the pose of the Apollo Belvedere. Until the late twentieth century, it was assumed that the pose was transposed from the earlier statue. Based on Daniel Chester French's journals, modern art historians have shown that the Apollo Belvedere was only one of several statues that were used in the research for The Minute Man.

The statue was unveiled in 1875 for the centennial of the Battle of Concord. It received critical acclaim and continues to be praised by commentators. The statue has been a suffragette symbol and a symbol of the United States National Guard and its components, the Army National Guard, and the Air National Guard, and depicted on coins such as the 1925 Lexington–Concord Sesquicentennial half dollar and the 2000 Massachusetts state quarter.

Minutemen or Minute Companies were a part of the militia of the Province of Massachusetts Bay. The name minutemen comes from the idea that they would be ready to fight with a minute's notice.[1] The force was created in response to the Massachusetts militia's failure to respond to the Powder Alarm in September 1774.[2] Unlike the general militia, which was made up of all able-bodied white men between 16 and 60, the two companies of minutemen were made up young volunteers who were paid one shilling, eight pence for their time drilling three times a week.[3][4] The other difference between the general militia and minutemen was how officers were appointed. In the general militia, officers were appointed by the governor as a political favor; officers of minutemen were elected by their peers.[3] By February 1775, Concord, Massachusetts had 104 minutemen in two companies.[3]

In 1775, the Massachusetts Provincial Congress designated Concord as the stockpile for patriot cannons, gunpowder, and ammunition.[5] In response to the growing stockpile of arms, British Army General Thomas Gage sent spies to Concord to survey the preparations.[6] Based on the reports from spies and instructions from Secretary of State for America William Legge, Earl of Dartmouth, Gage ordered a preemptive strike on Concord.[7] At daybreak on April 19, 1775, six companies of grenadiers and light infantry under the command of major John Pitcairn met a group of 70 militiamen under the command of John Parker on the Lexington Common.[8] The militiamen were alerted to the British advance by Paul Revere, William Dawes, and Samuel Prescott who traveled from Boston. It is unknown who fired the first shot of the Battle of Lexington, but after less than 30 minutes of fighting, eight militiamen were killed and nine were wounded. [9] After dispersing the patriots, Pitcairn moved his troops on to Concord.

Based on alerts from Prescott and reports from Lexington 150 minutemen from Concord and Lincoln mustered on the Concord Common under the command of James Barrett.[10] After meeting the advancing British troops, the minutemen retreated to higher ground without firing a shot.[11] Since the British troops had control of the town, they proceeded to search for and destroy the stockpiled supplies.[12] The cannon, musket balls, and flour were all rendered unusable, but the gunpowder was removed before it could be seized.[13] While the British were searching the town, the minutemen moved to the Old North Bridge and were reinforced by militiamen from other towns.[14] At the bridge, 400 minutemen and militiamen repelled the British advance and forced them to retreat.[15] Many of the minutemen who participated in the Battle of Concord went home after the British retreated from the bridge.[16] However, minutemen from other towns skirmished with the British troops during their march back to Boston.[17]

In 1825, the Bunker Hill Monument Association donated $500 (equivalent to $11,437 in 2020) to Concord to build a monument to the Battle of Concord.[18] The original plan was to place the monument "near the town pump" in Concord.[19] Due to disagreements within the town, nothing was done with the money until Ezra Ripley donated land for the monument near the Old North Bridge in 1835. After the donation, the town had Solomon Willard design a simple 25-foot-tall (7.6-meter) granite obelisk to commemorate the 60th anniversary of the Battle of Concord.[19] The "Concord Hymn" was written by transcendentalist writer Ralph Waldo Emerson for the dedication of the monument in 1836.[20] At the ceremony, it was sung to the tune of "Old Hundred".[21]

To the dislike of Emerson, the obelisk stands on the bank of the river where the British stood during battle.[22] The Minute Man was created for the centennial celebration of the battle in 1875. Unlike the earlier monument, it was to be placed on the bank where the Massachusetts militia stood.[22]

